JUDY WOODRUFF: In the day's
other major story: One headline
in London said it all, "Mayhem,"
the morning after a ballot
box drubbing for British Prime
Minister Theresa May and her
Conservative Party.
Special correspondent
Malcolm Brabant reports.
MALCOLM BRABANT: It was a
painful reckoning for a prime
minister whose election gamble
failed in a stunning fashion.
But after meeting with
the queen, Theresa May
insisted she will carry on.
THERESA MAY, British
Prime Minister: I will
now form a government,
a government that can
provide certainty and lead
Britain forward at this
critical time for our country.
MALCOLM BRABANT: May had
hoped the snap election
would boost Conservative
dominance in Parliament,
and give her a stronger hand
in negotiating Britain's
exit with the European Union.
Instead, the Tories lost 13
seats in the House of Commons.
The opposition Labor
Party, led by Jeremy
Corbyn, gained 32 seats.
THERESA MAY: I had wanted to
achieve a larger majority, but
that wasn't the result that
we secured.
And, as I reflect on the
results, I will reflect
on what we need to do
in the future to take
the party forward.
MALCOLM BRABANT: At Westminster,
a demonstrator wearing a May
mask laid flowers on a mock
grave, amid rising calls for
the prime minister to resign.
Labor leader Corbyn
led the charge.
JEREMY CORBYN, Leader, Labor
Party: It was her campaign,
it was her decision to call
the election, it was her name
out there, and she was saying
she was doing it to bring about
strong and stable government.
Well, this morning, it doesn't
look like a strong government,
it doesn't look like a
stable government, it doesn't
look like a government that
has any program whatsoever.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Corbyn's
success came in part from
cooperating with the grassroots
campaign normalization
momentum, which took advice
from Bernie Sanders' volunteers.
Adam Klug is a
national organizer.
ADAM KLUG, National Organizer:
You build up relationships
with people on the doorstep.
You listen to them.
You communicate your ideas
effectively and help train
people on persuading people of
why Labor's policies made sense.
MALCOLM BRABANT: But May's
opponents aren't the only
ones questioning her role.
Anna Soubry is a Conservative
member of Parliament.
ANNA SOUBRY, Parliament Member:
This is a very bad moment
for the Conservative Party
and we need to take stock,
and our leader needs
to take stock as well.
MALCOLM BRABANT: Will
Conservatives go as far as
removing May from power?
Anand Menon, a professor at
King's College London, says it
depends on several key factors.
ANAND MENON, King's College
London: Firstly, the
availability of someone
else who can command
support in the party, secondly,
the scale of opposition in the
party to her, and, thirdly,
whether or not the members of
the parliamentary party think
it's better to try and get rid
of her now or have a
period of calm where
things can bed themselves
in after the election,
before maybe trying to do a
leadership election next year.
MALCOLM BRABANT: May has
been criticized for running
a lackluster campaign.
It was marked by a proposal
to force elderly people to pay
more for their care and her
decision to skip a
televised debate.
Then came the terror attacks
in Manchester and London, which
refocused the race on security,
and May's role in
cutting police ranks.
And there's Brexit.
The U.K.'s withdrawal talks
with the E.U. are due to
begin in just 10 days.
JOHN SPRINGFORD, Center for
European Reform: This was
certainly a rejection of Theresa
May's very tough Brexit strategy
where she was going to cleave
a lot of the links between
the U.K. and the E.U.
MALCOLM BRABANT: John Springford
is director of research at the
Center for European Reform.
JOHN SPRINGFORD: There's
only about 18 months
left to negotiate the
Brexit deal, and if,
say, we have another three
or four months while the
government is formed or we have
fresh elections, then
there's much less time.
And so the E.U. then has an
awful lot of power towards the
end of the negotiating process.
MALCOLM BRABANT: For now,
May needs a coalition
partner to form a governing
majority in Parliament,
most likely Northern Ireland's
Democratic Unionist Party.
The group is pro-Brexit,
but well to the right
on social issues.
There's broad agreement
across the political
spectrum that Theresa
May is living on borrowed
time.
The Labor Party believes that
her coalition of convenience
with Northern Ireland's DUP
is unsustainable and that
there will be a new general
election in the not-too-distant
future.
Mrs. May wants to remain in
office for the next five years,
but most analysts agree that
the Conservative establishment
will terminate her premiership
when the time is right and
they will select another
candidate to lead them into the
next general election -- Judy.
JUDY WOODRUFF: Malcolm
Brabant, in London.